# Admixture_scripts
scripts to convert to ped format from vcf and quality of life script to run admixture

You need a filtered vcf file to do the conversion and download plink from here: https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink2 (version 1.9 stable Linux 32-bit or 64-bits of you know your linux distribution has 64-bit, otherwise go with 32-bit, it works for both). Then make a symbolic link for plink to the environment path (sudo ln -s /path/to/plink /usr/local/bin , make sure that the paths are absolute and not relative!) and make sure that plink has executive rights (sudo chmod +x /path/to/plink). The conversion script is run using python3. to run it type in the terminal: python3 /path/to/convertVcf2.py -i /path/to/myOrganism.vcf -o /path/to/myOrganism
Note that there should be no ending on the output file (-o).

To use the admixture script, it is required to have admixture in the environment path, download from: http://dalexander.github.io/admixture/download.html (version 1.30 Linux x86[\_64]) and create symbolic link like above (sudo ln -s /path/to/admixture /usr/local/bin) and set the executive rights (sudo chmod +x /path/to/admixture). Then use the script like this: /path/to/admixture.sh myOrganism.ped outputfolderName maxK NrThreads (example: /path/to/admixture.sh onosma.ped onosma_admixture 10 12). First is name or path to your ped file, second is the name of the folder where it will output the results and the third is the number of threads to use and the last is the max nr of K to which to analyze.

Before we try and plot the results, we need to sort it by admixture ratios in order to get an easily readable plot. First you need to open a spreadsheet and copy the content of your popmap (same as used when running stacks) into the first two columns, then copy the individual names in the first column into the third column, this will be used as part of the group map later. Now copy the content of the best K Q file (mine is called spic28.4.Q) into the columns following the first three. At first this Q file will just look like a mess of numbers, but there is a simply structure involved. 

Each column in the Q file is the ratio of "belonging" or "relatedness" of each individual to a specific structure (group/region etc). We call that the admixture ratio. The sum of all admixture ratios for one individual (one row) should always be 1, it might be slightly less or higher due to rounding of long decimal numbers. This means that the first column in the first row is the admixture ratio of individual 1 to structure 1, how much of the first individuals genome comes from the first structure modeled in admixture. Note that this isn't absolute or 100% correct, this is just the ratio modeled under the specific K and shows if anything the admixture of different major structures within the individuals, a simplification that is not accurate on a detailed level, but likely highly informative on a larger scale.

So in order make your structure plot look a bit more intuitive you can either manually cut and paste rows in your spreadsheet to move individuals and populations until those that belong together in a structure are next to each other or you can sort admixture ratios using the built-in spreadsheet function. The latter method can be a bit tricky if there are more than 2 structures (K>2). A trick to make this easier is to first sort the first column (structure) in a descending order, then where that structure reaches roughly 50%, you introduce a new empty row. This allows you to sort the two separate parts independently. First sort the first (upper) part by the population name (second column) this will make sure that all individuals that are in the same population are together. Next, sort the second half of the list of admixture ratios, then repeat the previous when it reaches 50% until you have sorted all structures (columns), as well as the population names within each section.

Once you have finished sorting your data, introduce a new column in between the third column (the column with the copy of list of individual names) and the fourth column (the first admixture ratio). You should now have a sheet that is divided row-wise by the number structure you have (the same number as you have structure columns), these are you structures, and column-wise by an empty fourth column.

In the fourth column you have to enter a name for each structure, either the region where they are found or the cardinal direction of the structure in the distribution of your species, or some other relevant name. The easiest way to give a group name to all individuals within a structure, is to write the name of the structure into the first row cell for said structure (section divided by an empty row) in the new empty fourth column. Then copy that cell (not the name within the cell, just mark the cell and copy it) and mark all empty cells in the fourth column for the structure then paste into the marked cells. This should copy the name into all empty cells of the structure. Continue to do the same for the other structures. Once all individuals have been assigned to a group, remove the empty rows between the structures. Make sure that the first row starts with the entry of the first individual and not a title for the column (a header such as ‘individual’ or ‘population’). No header/title is allowed in the final file. Now save the spreadsheet as a csv file (in Libreoffice Calc: File>Save as… then write a name ( admix_sorted for example) and in the lower right corner, click the drop down menu ‘all formats’ and scroll down and click ‘text CSV (.csv)’, then click save in the upper right corner). If you get prompted about settings for the csv file, choose to have delimiter be a comma (,) string delimiter doesn't matter much.

Now open the R script plot_admixture3.R in Rstudio. You will need to edit the line: setwd("/path/to/folder/") , by replacing /path/to/folder/ within the quotation marks with the full path to the folder where your csv file is at. This will also be your output folder. Then replace: admix_sorted.csv in the line inputfile.name = "admix_sorted.csv" to whatever you named your file. Then run all the lines of the script. It will create both a pdf and a png image of your plot.

If you want to plot your admixture results to pie charts on a map, you first need to calculate the average admixture ratio for each population.

you do this using the csv file that you produced earlier. First open it in a a spreadsheet (make sure that commas are used as delimiter). Copy the content of the file into a new spreadsheet. 

Next you want to calculate the average for each population. you first set this up for the first individual: in the cell next to the last admixture ratio in the first row (individual), write a function to calculate the average of all the individuals in the first population, for the first admixture ratio (example: =AVERAGE(E1:E4)). Mark the cell with the average function, left click and hold on the black square and drag it so that the average function is applied to all but the last admixture ratio. Because the pie chart function in R requires the sum of the admixture ratios to be exactly one, you need to calculated the last average admixture ratio as one minus the sum of the other admixture ratios. Don’t worry about this not being completely accurate! The difference in the actually average and the sum you calculate will for the most part be exact and in worst case only be of by a negligible fraction. Now you should have as many average admixture ratios as there are admixture ratios (Nr of Ks for the structure model).

You can now mark and copy all of the average calculation cells for the first individual and then paste it into the row where the first individual in the next population is. Be mindful to adjust the function (all in the row!) if some populations have fewer or more individuals than the first.

Now you only want the information about the population and the average admixture ratio, but if you remove individuals the calculations will obviously break. There are several way get around this, but the easiest is to mark all used cells in the current sheet, then copy it. Then create a new sheet where you will paste the copied cells as unformatted cells, in LibreOffice Calc you do this by right clicking on the cell in the first row of the first column, then Paste special>unformatted text. To make the process of removing rows with no average admixture easier, sort the sheet by one of the average admixture ratios. This will make all of those rows with average admixture ratios be together. Now remove all rows with no average admixture. Then delete the first and third row with individual names, those are useless now. Then delete the original admixture ratios (it should be the first half of the cells after the column with group names). 

Now you need to add the coordinates where the pie charts should be drawn on the map, first create two new column in between the second (group name) and the third (first average admixture ratio). Then add the longitude in the third column, then the latitude in the fourth. You should now have the first column with the population name, the second with group name, the third with longitude, the fourth with latitude and the rest with average admixture ratios.

Since you will want to save this as a csv file, you need to remove the first sheet with the average calculations. Alternatively, you can save the current file as a normal spreadsheet, then copy the content of the second sheet (with the average admixture ratios) to a new spreadsheet and saving it as a csv file (same way as with the first dataset).

To plot the data, open piechartMap2.R in Rstudio. Install the packages rworldmap and plotrix if you haven’t installed them already (use install.packages(“library”), where you replace “library” with the package to be installed (with quotation marks)). Now you have to first edit the line: setwd("/path/to/folder/") to the folder where the csv is found (it will also be the output folder). Then edit the name of the csv file in the line: inputfile.name = "average_admixture_ratios.csv". Finally there is an option to print labels next to the the piecharts, it is off by default, but if you want to turn it on, to for example check that the populations are in the correct positions (or just to remind yourself of what is what), you can change FALSE in the line: print.label = FALSE  to TRUE (Note: it has to be in capital letters). It will now print a map with pie charts.
